:SCEP: 104
:Title: Document handles and citation formats
:Author: Raphael ‘kena’ Poss
:Status: Draft
:Type: Process
:Created: 2014-06-18

Introduction
============

A **document handle** is formed by:

- an object fingerprint;
- zero or more CoE [#SCEP-102]_ signatures;
- an advisory author list;
- an advisory title.

There are already various standards to print out the author list and
document title to create a bibliographic citation in an academic work.
With the advent of the internet, these standards have evolved to
also include identifiers that refer to online databases; for example
it is commonly accepted that a DOI can be present, by inserting the
text "DOI:" followed by the DOI at the end of a citation.

The Structured Commons model does not intend to change the conventions
around the display of fields already commonly present in
bibliographic references. For example, as explained in SCEP 102
[#SCEP-102]_, it is possible to reuse existing DOI, arXiv and ACM
identifier details in citations as-is, as proper Structured Common
Certificates of existence (CoE) signatures.

The main addition of this SCEP is to **extend citations with the
Structured Commons fingerprint** for the work being cited, in addition
to the other citation details.

Benefits
========

Using object fingerprints in citations enable:

- verifying that the objects referenced by a new work are not modified
  after the new work is published;
- building long-term confidence in the trust network of certificates of existence,
  as explained in SCEP 102 [#SCEP-102]_, section "Very long term durability".


Example
=======

The following two citations illustrate use of a document handle:

- "short" format, with only the Structured Commons fingerprint:

     R Poss, S Altmeyer, M Thompson, R Jelier. Aca 2.0: Questions and
     Answers (v2). 2014. fp:FvYPWVbnhezNY5vdtqyyef0wpvj149A7SquozxdVe3jigg.

- "long" format, with all dates and multiple CoE signatures:

     R Poss, S Altmeyer, M Thompson, R Jelier. Aca 2.0: Questions
     and Answers (v2).  May 2014.
     fp:FvYPWVbnhezNY5vdtqyyef0wpvj149A7SquozxdVe3jigg.
     `arxiv:2014-05-10:1404.7753v2`__.
     `btc:2014-05-30:a9ed00bd63bdb382acc3b70198ec0861fd499c28eed1e18b5c0d933ce28af8fc`__.

     .. __: http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.7753v2
     .. __: http://www.proofofexistence.com/detail/a9ed00bd63bdb382acc3b70198ec0861fd499c28eed1e18b5c0d933ce28af8fc

References
==========

.. [#SCEP-102] SCEP 102. "Certificates of existence".
   (http://www.structured-commons.org/scep0102.html)

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


..
   Local Variables:
   mode: rst
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
