:SCEP: 102
:Title: Certificates of existence
:Author: Raphael ‘kena’ Poss
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2014-06-16

Definition
==========

A **certificate of existence** (CoE) binds an object with a date stamp
and asserts that the object existed no later than the certified date.

A CoE exists outside of the object that it certifies. Each object can
be attested by more than one CoE.

CoEs are intended for display in citation contexts, for example "this
document refers to another document D, attested by CoEs X, Y, and Z".

The Structured Commons model supports multiple *certification methods*
to generate and verify CoEs, including a variety of historical
mechanisms already in use in academic publishing.

Certification methods
=====================

New certifications methods may be defined over time, as long as they are publicly
documented and certificates can be independently verified by users.

Each certification method must provide at least the following services:

- from an object or fingerprint, generate a CoE for a calendar date no
  earlier than the date of the request;
- from a CoE and object, verify the CoE is valid and
  return the earliest attested date for the fingerprint;
- represent the CoE as a textual, printable *CoE signature* that can be
  embedded in citation contexts.

All CoE signatures must match the following common format: the method
name, followed by a colon, followed optionally by the certified date stamp with
format YYYY-MM-DD and a colon, followed by a textual
representation of the CoE::

  signature: METHOD ':' [ DATESTAMP ':' ] CERTIFICATE

This format is purposely defined to overlap with the syntax already
used in academic works to refer to certificates of existence, cf. the
next section.

Predefined certification methods
================================

The following CoE methods are predefined:

======= =============================================== ==================================
Name    Meaning of CoE signature                        Base URL for verification
======= =============================================== ==================================
doi     registered Digital Object Identifier [#]_ [#]_  http://dx.doi.org/%s
acmid   publication ID in the ACM Digital Library [#]_  http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=%s
arxiv   ArXiv document identifier                       http://arxiv.org/abs/%s
btc     Document digest                                 http://www.proofofexistence.com/detail/%s
ocn     OCLC Control Number [#]_ [#]_                   http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/%s
isbn    International Standard Book Number [#]_ [#]_    N/A
======= =============================================== ==================================

These methods correspond to historical mechanisms that are already trusted by scholars
to deliver reliable registration services.

Some example valid CoE signatures:

arxiv:2014-04-30:1404.7753
   method: arXiv, attested date April 30th, 2014, certificate "1404.7753"

arxiv:1404.7753
   method: arXiv, omitted date, certificate "1404.7753"

doi:2014-06-09:10.1145/2618137.2618139
   method: DOI, attested date June 9th, 2014, certificate "10.1145/2618137.2618139"

doi:10.1145/2618137.2618139
   method: DOI, omitted date, certificate "10.1145/2618137.2618139"

acmid:2014-06-09:2618137.2618139
   method: ACMID, attested date June 9th, 2014, certificate "2618137.2618139"

acmid:2618137.2618139
   method: ACMID, omitted date, certificate "2618137.2618139"

.. note::
   These CoE signature formats correspond to the format already used by scholars
   to embed the DOI, ArXiv, ACM id, etc. in bibliographical citations. This
   choice is intentional, to enable the direct capture of this existing practice
   within the Structured Commons model.

Hypertext references
====================

In a hypertext context, each CoE signature representation should be
configured as a hyperlink to the certificate URI.

For example, an ``arxiv`` CoE sig can redirect to the URI
``http://arxiv.org/abs/`` followed by the arXiv identifier:
`arxiv:2014-04-30:1404.7753`__

.. __: http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.7753

See the table above for a list of base URLs to use for the predefined
certification methods.

Very long term durability
=========================

As certification requires trusted 3rd parties, a risk exists that the
disappearance of a certification authority will make the verification
of a single internet-based CoE difficult, expensive or even
impossible.

This risk increases over time, and ensuring CoE verification stays possible
is quite relevant considering the Structured Commons model envisions
preserving knowledge over the very long term (50+ years).

Historically, durable CoE verifiability was ensured by printing
journals on paper, and archiving multiple paper copies over time and
in different libraries over the world. Even hundred years later, we
are able to check 18th century articles existed no later than a
particular date by investigating and cross-checking paper
archives. This method is effective even for works that are not
published in journals, *as long as journals cite them*: if a work A is
cited by journal J which is attested to exist at date D by a set of
printed copies, then A is attested to have existed no later than D.

Starting with the Internet, more and more works are published "online
only" and never cited by printed journals, so the CoE durability
provided by journals becomes largely ineffective.

There are three strategies to guarantee the very long term
verifiability of CoEs, even without printed journals, in increasing
order of effectiveness:

1. creating multiple CoEs using more than one certification method (decreases the risk that
   the disappearance of one certification authority makes verification impossible);
2. archive CoE databases in durable media (eg. paper or microfilm
   archives that map fingerprints to known CoEs);
3. ensure that **works are cited using both their fingerprint and known CoEs**, so
   that the structured global web of knowledge serves as distributed
   trusted database of CoEs.

The last strategy is the most robust: if a work A is attested by CoE
X, and B cites A using A's fingerprint and X's signature, and the web
of knowledge attests B *via fingerprint* by citation in multiple other
works, then it becomes impossible to modify A or fake another CoE (or
attested date) because this would change A's fingerprint and thus B's.
Over time, the *structured citation network* will become the trusted database
of CoEs for past works.

References
==========

.. [#] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier
.. [#] ISO/DIS 26324:2012. "Information and documentation -- Digital object identifier system".
.. [#] http://dl.acm.org/
.. [#] http://www.oclc.org/batchload/controlnumber.en.html
.. [#] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_Computer_Library_Center
.. [#] ISO 2108:2005. "Information and documentation -- International standard book number (ISBN)".
.. [#] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: rst
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
